---
layout: post
title: "Enforce and Encourage"
description: "Making best practice opt out not opt in"
date: 2023-06-18
---

In our industry we have a tendancy to document best practices and then expect people to follow them manually. I would like to discuss alternative approaches.

## Enforcing your interface

We have all seen interfaces such as this:

{% highlight scala %}
case class Config(append: Boolean, bufferSize: Option[Long] = None)
trait Writer {
    def init(config: Config): Unit
    def write(string: String): Unit
    def flush(): Unit
    def close(): Unit
}
class FileWriter(file: String) extends Writer {
    // implement writing to file
}
{% endhighlight %}

This is quite a simple interface, however it already presents the user of this interface with a few questions to. From the above we can't really tell what happens if (or more likely when) we use the API in an "incorrect" way. For example:

- What happens if we call `write` or `flush` after calling `close`? Are execptions thrown or does it silently no-op?
- What happens if `init` is never called? Does the writer get initiated with a default config? Can this auto-open happen after a close?
- What happens if we call `init` multiple times? What if we call `write` between the calls to `init`?
- Does it matter if we call `close` at all? Can we call it more than once?

Some of these concerns can be addressed by adding the different constraints to the documentation. Let's explore what's _possible_ for us to write in client code:

{% highlight scala %}
object Client {
    def application = {
        val writer = new FileWriter("file.txt")
        try {
            hello(writer)
            // If we initialise after writing, does the previous write fail?
            // Silently or with exception? Or worse, if we meant to append,
            // did the writer already overwrite what was in the file?
            writer.init(Config(append = true))
            world(writer)
        } finally {
            // We correctly always close the writer, but what happens
            // here if the .close() in world() was already called?
            writer.close()
        }
        // We've already closed the writer, can we now call goodbye?
        // What happens when we do?
        goodbye(writer)
    }

    private def hello(writer: Writer): Unit = {
        writer.write("Hello")
        writer.flush()
    }

    private def world(writer: Writer): Unit = {
        writer.write("World")
        // If there has been an exception thrown by the above
        // line, we don't close the writer!
        writer.close()
    }

    private def goodbye(writer: Writer): Unit = {
        // Does it really make sense to init again?
        writer.init(Config(append = false))
        writer.write("All gone")
    }

}
{% endhighlight %}

Our current interface has expectations, there is a contract that _must_ be respected but we are pushing this expectation onto the client. Namely the expectation is that you:
1. `init` the `Writer`
1. Perform whatever `write`s you need, `flush`ing when desired
1. Call `close` once at the end, even in the case of exceptions

Given this is such a common pattern, there is a simple solution. We can use the loan pattern to clean this up. We can _enforce_ that users _always_ follow the requirements because there is no way to avoid them.

{% highlight scala %}
case class Config(append: Boolean, bufferSize: Option[Long] = None)

trait Writer {
    def write(string: String): Writer
    def flush(): Writer
}

private class FileWriter(file: String) extends Writer {
    def init(config: Config): Unit
    def close(): Unit
    // implements writing to file
}

object FileWriter {
    def writeToFile(file: String, config: Config)(f: Writer => Writer): Unit = {
        val writer = new FileWriter(file)
        writer.init(config)
        try { f(writer) } finally { writer.close() }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Note that not much has actually changed about the _implementation_ of writing to a file, but the _interface_ we expose has changed drastically! It never makes sense for the client to be able to `close` the file handle arbitrarily, so we have enforced it gets called after we have finished writing. It only makes sense to `init` once at startup, so we have enforced this. Now we take a second look at what client code we can write:

{% highlight scala %}
object Client {
    def application = FileWriter.writeToFile("file.txt", Config(append = true))(writeAll)

    val writeAll = hello andThen world andThen goodbye

    private val hello = (writer: Writer) => writer.write("Hello").flush()

    private val world = (writer: Writer) => writer.write("World")

    private val goodbye = (writer: Writer) => writer.write("All gone")

}
{% endhighlight %}


It is my opinion these problems tend to come more from an OOP mentality, but they still can happen in FP. It is quite simple to invert control using higher order functions and the loan pattern here, it is impossible for client code to do the wrong thing, you can't even write invalid function calls. We have _enforced_ our interface.

As you may have noted the style of programming has changed a little, because we have changed our interface to encourage a fluent more composable and functional style of writing. It's more likely people will see these examples and copy paste them meaning you are going to **encourage** the intuitive chaining of functions and **discourage** the imperitive style of writing.

There are many more practical examples that follow this patern, particularly IO operations; for example database handles and as we've seen, files. Similarly encryption key generation in Java suffers the same problems.

## Encouraging Best Practice

Best practice in OOP is to prefer composition over inheritence, however inheritence is the default in a lot of languages, it's so trivial to do. Looking at scala 2, we need to opt-in to the removal of inheritence:

{% highlight scala %}
class Foo { def asString = "Hopefully this" }
// This compiles 😔
class SillyFoo extends Foo {
    override def asString = "But instead this"
}

// We have to opt-in using the final keyword
final class Foo { def asString = "constant" }
// Cannot extend final class, does not compile
class NotAllowed extends Foo
{% endhighlight %}

Thinking from an FP point of view we shouldn't extend classes at all, so this isn't ideal. With scala 3 a new feature called [open classes](http://dotty.epfl.ch/docs/reference/other-new-features/open-classes.html) is introducing changes that move us in a new, better direction. The default is now better practice and you have to _opt out_ to get inheritence.

{% highlight scala %}
// Opt out of best practice using open
open class Foo { def asString = "Hopefully this" }
class SillyFoo extends Foo {
    override def asString = "But instead this"
}

class Foo { def asString = "constant" }
// In another file, we cannot extend class without specific adhoc extensions import
class NotAllowed extends Foo
{% endhighlight %}

This could be extended to apply to functions as well e.g. `open def asString: String` with `final def` being the default and being even stricter e.g. taking any non `open` class as `final` rather than allowing extensions to non open classes within the same file.

This could be applied to multiple other language features, for example partial match errors in scala are compiler warnings. If you want to make these break the build at compile time you must add the `-Xfatal-warnings` compiler flag. Instead of "stricter compiler" flags we could have "lenient Compiler" flags e.g. "Allow partial match" which would encourage full pattern matches by default is discourage partial matches.

Tools such as [wartremover](https://www.wartremover.org/) can help you encourage best practice making it opt in to perform actions such as throwing exceptions.

## Security

This is one of my biggest pet peeves, we make it easy to spin up an unsecure service open to the whole internet. Cloud providers tend to prioritise easy deployment of "Hello world" applications, making best security practices opt in. It is left as a task to the developers to enforce as many IAM restrictions and firewall rules as they can, trying to keep up with all the possible security holes we find.

For me it would go a long way if when I created a database instance, it was automatically on a private IP and noone could access it, requiring a very specific action on my part to allow access to said database. Making the removal of security measures an explicit opt out action I had to take.

If you want to enforce such things on your own Infrastructure, using IaC (infrastructure as code, such as [terraform](https://www.terraform.io/)) and limiting human access to cloud resources to read only by default is a good first step. Then make it easy to update the IaC repository and have those changes applied separately by either admins or an automated process encourages an audit trailed list of changes that must be centralised.

## Summary

This applies not only to software, for example I recently stopped buying chocolates for myself, put a fruit bowl by my desk and moved my less healthy snacks to the other room. This encourages me to have healthier snacks and I've found it has quite a dramatic effect on my behaviour.

Similarly if you respond more frequently and quickly on slack than you do to emails or comments on tools such as trello/JIRA, people will in general contact you that way, encouraging people to contact you through your preferred method.

Try to **enforce** what constraints you can, when you need to make exceptions **actively encourage** the better practice and **actively discourage** the bad practices. As humans, we are a little lazy and we will take the path of least resistence, if you put up a barrier and make it more difficult to follow the bad path, you'll find it less travelled.
